<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 25: Of the Triumphant Summer Array of the Maid</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Of the Triumphant Summer Array of the Maid</span>
			</h2>
			<p>When the day was bright Walter arose, and met the Maid coming from the riverbank, fresh and rosy from the water.  She paled a little when they met face to face, and she shrank from him shyly.  But he took her hand and kissed her frankly; and the two were glad, and had no need to tell each other of their joy, though much else they deemed they had to say, could they have found words thereto.</p>
			<p>So they came to their fire and sat down, and fell to breakfast; and ere they were done, the Maid said: “My Master, thou seest we be come nigh unto the hill-country, and today about sunset, belike, we shall come into the Land of the Bear-folk; and both it is, that there is peril if we fall into their hands, and that we may scarce escape them.  Yet I deem that we may deal with the peril by wisdom.”</p>
			<p>“What is the peril?” said Walter; “I mean, what is the worst of it?”</p>
			<p>Said the Maid: “To be offered up in sacrifice to their God.”</p>
			<p>“But if we escape death at their hands, what then?” said Walter.</p>
			<p>“One of two things,” said she; “the first that they shall take us into their tribe.”</p>
			<p>“And will they sunder us in that case?” said Walter.</p>
			<p>“Nay,” said she.</p>
			<p>Walter laughed and said: “Therein is little harm then.  But what is the other chance?”</p>
			<p>Said she: “That we leave them with their goodwill, and come back to one of the lands of Christendom.”</p>
			<p>Said Walter: “I am not all so sure that this is the better of the two choices, though, forsooth, thou seemest to think so.  But tell me now, what like is their God, that they should offer up newcomers to him?”</p>
			<p>“Their God is a woman,” she said, “and the Mother of their nation and tribes (or so they deem) before the days when they had chieftains and Lords of Battle.”</p>
			<p>“That will be long ago,” said he; “how then may she be living now?”</p>
			<p>Said the Maid: “Doubtless that woman of yore agone is dead this many and many a year; but they take to them still a new woman, one after other, as they may happen on them, to be in the stead of the Ancient Mother.  And to tell thee the very truth right out, she that lieth dead in the Pillared Hall was even the last of these; and now, if they knew it, they lack a God.  This shall we tell them.”</p>
			<p>“Yea, yea!” said Walter, “a goodly welcome shall we have of them then, if we come amongst them with our hands red with the blood of their God!”</p>
			<p>She smiled on him and said: “If I come amongst them with the tidings that I have slain her, and they trow therein, without doubt they shall make me Lady and Goddess in her stead.”</p>
			<p>“This is a strange word,” said Walter “but if so they do, how shall that further us in reaching the kindreds of the world, and the folk of Holy Church?”</p>
			<p>She laughed outright, so joyous was she grown, now that she knew that his life was yet to be a part of hers.  “Sweetheart,” she said, “now I see that thou desirest wholly what I desire; yet in any case, abiding with them would be living and not dying, even as thou hadst it e’en now.  But, forsooth, they will not hinder our departure if they deem me their God; they do not look for it, nor desire it, that their God should dwell with them daily.  Have no fear.”  Then she laughed again, and said: “What! thou lookest on me and deemest me to be but a sorry image of a goddess; and me with my scanty coat and bare arms and naked feet!  But wait!  I know well how to array me when the time cometh.  Thou shalt see it!  And now, my Master, were it not meet that we took to the road?”</p>
			<p>So they arose, and found a ford of the river that took the Maid but to the knee, and so set forth up the greensward of the slopes whereas there were but few trees; so went they faring toward the hill-country.</p>
			<p>At the last they were come to the feet of the very hills, and in the hollows betwixt the buttresses of them grew nut and berry trees, and the greensward round about them was both thick and much flowery.  There they stayed them and dined, whereas Walter had shot a hare by the way, and they had found a bubbling spring under a grey stone in a bight of the coppice, wherein now the birds were singing their best.</p>
			<p>When they had eaten and had rested somewhat, the Maid arose and said: “Now shall the Queen array herself, and seem like a very goddess.”</p>
			<p>Then she fell to work, while Walter looked on; and she made a garland for her head of eglantine where the roses were the fairest; and with mingled flowers of the summer she wreathed her middle about, and let the garland of them hang down to below her knees; and knots of the flowers she made fast to the skirts of her coat, and did them for arm-rings about her arms, and for anklets and sandals for her feet.  Then she set a garland about Walter’s head, and then stood a little off from him and set her feet together, and lifted up her arms, and said: “Lo now! am I not as like to the Mother of Summer as if I were clad in silk and gold? and even so shall I be deemed by the folk of the Bear.  Come now, thou shalt see how all shall be well.”</p>
			<p>She laughed joyously; but he might scarce laugh for pity of his love.  Then they set forth again, and began to climb the hills, and the hours wore as they went in sweet converse; till at last Walter looked on the Maid, and smiled on her, and said: “One thing I would say to thee, lovely friend, to wit: wert thou clad in silk and gold, thy stately raiment might well suffer a few stains, or here and there a rent maybe; but stately would it be still when the folk of the Bear should come up against thee.  But as to this flowery array of thine, in a few hours it shall be all faded and nought.  Nay, even now, as I look on thee, the meadow-sweet that hangeth from thy girdle-stead has waxen dull, and welted; and the blossoming eyebright that is for a hem to the little white coat of thee is already forgetting how to be bright and blue.  What sayest thou then?”</p>
			<p>She laughed at his word, and stood still, and looked back over her shoulder, while with her fingers she dealt with the flowers about her side like to a bird preening his feathers.  Then she said: “Is it verily so as thou sayest?  Look again!”</p>
			<p>So he looked, and wondered; for lo! beneath his eyes the spires of the meadow-sweet grew crisp and clear again, the eyebright blossoms shone once more over the whiteness of her legs; the eglantine roses opened, and all was as fresh and bright as if it were still growing on its own roots.</p>
			<p>He wondered, and was even somedeal aghast; but she said: “Dear friend, be not troubled! did I not tell thee that I am wise in hidden lore?  But in my wisdom shall be no longer any scathe to any man.  And again, this my wisdom, as I told thee erst, shall end on the day whereon I am made all happy.  And it is thou that shall wield it all, my Master.  Yet must my wisdom needs endure for a little season yet.  Let us on then, boldly and happily.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
